<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-35" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 style="text-align: center;" class="xhtml_h3_align">
XXXV.
</h3>

<p>
King Abenner was pricked to the heart by this inspired wisdom and with
loud voice and fervent heart confessed Christ his Saviour, and
forthwith forsook all superstitious error.  He venerated the sign of
the life-giving Cross in the sight of all and, in the hearing of all,
proclaimed our Lord Jesus Christ to be God.  By telling in full the
tale of his former ungodliness, and of his own cruelty and
blood-thirstiness toward the Christians, he proved himself a great
power for religion.  So here was proved in fact, the saying of Paul;
that where sin abounded, there did grace much more abound.
</p>

<p>
While then the learned Ioasaph was speaking of God, and of piety
towards him, to the dukes and satraps and all the people there
assembled, and was as it were with a tongue of fire piping unto them a
goodly ode, the grace of the Holy Spirit descended upon them, and moved
them to give glory to God, so that all the multitude cried aloud with
one voice, "Great is the God of the Christians, and there is none other
God but our Lord Jesus Christ, who, together with the Father and Holy
Ghost, is glorified."
</p>

<p>
Waxen full of heavenly zeal, King Abenner made a sturdy assault on the
idols, wrought of silver and gold, that were within his palace, and
tore them down to the ground.  Then he brake them into small pieces,
and distributed them to the poor, thus making that which had been
useless useful.  Furthermore he and his son besieged the idols' temples
and altars and levelled them even to the ground, and in their stead,
and to the honour of God, built holy courts.  And not only in the city
but throughout all the country also, thus did they in their zeal.  And
the evil spirits that dwelt in those altars were driven forth with
shrieks, and cried out in terror at the invincible power of our God.
And all the region round about, and the greater part of the neighbour
nations, were led, as by the hand, to the true Faith.  Then came the
holy Bishop, of whom we have spoken, and King Abenner was instructed,
and made perfect with Holy Baptism, in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.  And Ioasaph received him as he came up
from the Holy Font, in this strange way appearing as the begetter of
his own father, and proving the spiritual father to him that begat him
in the flesh: for he was the son of his heavenly Father, and verily
divine fruit of that divine Branch, which saith, "I am the vine, ye are
the branches."
</p>

<p>
Thus King Abenner, being born again of water and of the spirit,
rejoiced with joy unspeakable, and with him all the city and the region
round about received Holy Baptism, and they that were before darkness
now became children of light.  And every disease, and every assault of
evil spirits was driven far from the believers, and all were sane and
sound in body and in soul.  And many other miracles were wrought for
the confirmation of the Faith.  Churches too were built, and the
bishops, that had been hiding for fear, discovered themselves, and
received again their own churches, whilst others were chosen from the
priests and monks, to shepherd the flock of Christ.  But King Abenner,
having thus forsaken his former disgraceful life, and repented of his
evil deeds, handed over to his son the rule of all his kingdom. He
himself dwelt in solitude, continually casting dust on his head, and
groaning for very heaviness, and watering his face with his tears,
being alone, communing with him who is everywhere present and imploring
him to forgive his sins.  And he abased himself to such a depth of
contrition and humility, that he refused to name the name of God with
his own lips, and was scarce brought by his son's admonitions to make
so bold.  Thus the king passed through the good change and entered the
road that leadeth to virtue, so that his righteousness now surpassed
his former sins of ignorance.  For four years did he live thus in
repentance and tears and virtuous acts, and then fell into the sickness
whereof he died.  But when the end drew nigh, he began to fear and to
be dismayed, calling to remembrance the evil that he had wrought.  But
with comfortable words Ioasaph sought to ease the distress that had
fallen on him, saying, "Why art thou so full of heaviness, O my father,
and wily art thou so disquieted within time?  Set thy hope on God, and
give him thanks, who is the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of
them that remain in the sea afar, who crieth by the mouth of his
prophet, 'Wash you, make you clean: put away from before mine eyes the
wickedness of your souls; learn to do well'; and 'Though your sins be
as scarlet, I will make them white as snow; though they be red like
crimson, I will make them as wool.'  Fear not, therefore, O my father,
neither be of doubtful mind: for the sins of them that turn to God
prevail not against his infinite goodness.  For these, however many,
are subject to measure and number: but measure and number cannot limit
his goodness.  It is impossible then for that which is subject to
measure to exceed the unmeasurable."
</p>

<p>
With such comfortable words did Ioasaph cheer his soul, and bring him
to a good courage.  Then his father stretched out his hands, and gave
him thanks and prayed for him, blessing the day whereon Ioasaph was
born, and said "Dearest child, yet not child of me, but of mine
heavenly Father, with what gratitude can I repay thee?  With what words
of blessings may I bless thee?  What thanks shall I offer God for thee?
I was lost, and was found through thee: I was dead in sin and am alive
again: an enemy, and rebel against God, and am reconciled with him.
What reward therefore shall I give thee for all these benefits?  God is
he that shall make the due recompense."  Thus saying, he pressed many
kisses on his beloved son; then, when he had prayed, and said, "Into
thy hands, O God, thou lover of men, do I commit my spirit," he
committed his soul unto the Lord in penitence and peace.
</p>

<p>
Now, when Ioasaph had honoured with his tears his father that was dead,
and had reverently cared for his body, he buried him in a sepulchre
wherein devout men lay; not indeed clad in royal raiment, but robed in
the garment of penitence.  Standing on the sepulchre, and lifting up
his hands to heaven, the tears streaming in floods from his eyes, he
cried aloud unto God saying,
</p>

<p>
"O God, I thank thee, King of glory, alone mighty and immortal, that
thou hast not despised my petition, and hast not held thy peace at my
tears, but hast been pleased to turn this thy servant, my father, from
the way of wickedness, and to draw him to thyself, the Saviour of all,
departing him from the deceitfulness of idolatry, and granting him to
acknowledge thee, who art the very God and lover of souls.  And now, O
my Lord and God, whose ocean of goodness is uncharted, set him in that
place where much grass is, in a place of refreshment, where shineth the
light of thy countenance.  Remember not his old offences; but,
according to the multitude of thy mercies, blot out the handwriting of
his sins, and destroy the tablets of his debts, and set him at peace
with thy Saints whom he slew with fire and sword.  Charge them not to
be bitter against him.  For all things are possible with thee, the Lord
of all, save only to withhold pity from them that turn not unto thee;
this is impossible.  For thy pity is poured out upon all men, and thou
savest them that call upon thee, Lord Jesu Christ, because glory
becometh thee for ever and ever.  Amen."
</p>

<p>
Such were the prayers and intercessions that he made unto God, by the
space of seven full days, never leaving the grave, and never thinking
of meat or drink, and taking no refreshment of sleep: but he watered
the ground with his tears, and continued praying and moaning
unceasingly.  But, on the eighth day, he went back to his palace and
distributed amongst the poor all his wealth and riches, so that not one
person was left in want.
</p>




		</section>
	</body>
</html>
